(sec-cfl-summary)=

# Summary

In this section, we covered context-free languages and saw two
equivalent definitions:

1.  (Machine model) Context-free languages are those that are recognized
    by non-deterministic pushdown automata.
2.  (Generative model) Context-free languages are those that are
    generated by context-free grammars.

Intuitively, a pushdown automata is a finite automata augmented with a
stack, and context-free grammars have the additional power of recursion
over regular expressions.

::: {important} Power of Nondeterminism

Unlike finite automata, non-deterministic pushdown automata are strictly
more powerful than deterministic ones: there are languages that can be
recognized by a non-deterministic pushdown automata but not by a
deterministic pushdown automaton.

:::

## Languages that are not context-free

A canonical language that is not context-free is
$\{0^n1^n2^n \mid n \geq 0\}$.

While pushdown automata can some form of unbounded counting, they are
still very limited. Intuitively, the [PDA](#pda-0n1n) that recognizes
the language $\{0^n1^n \mid n \geq 0\}$ does so by matching the \$1\$s
that in the second half with the \$0\$s that appear using the stack.

::: {note} Matching input symbols using the stack

This idea of using the stack to do some sort of matching also appears in
the [PDA for even-length palindromes](#pda-even-pal) and the [PDA for
balanced parentheses](#pda-balanced).

:::

::: {seealso} Proving noncontext-free

There is a technique for proving a language is not context-free using
the [pumping lemma for context-free
languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pumping_lemma_for_context-free_languages).
However, this is outside the scope of this subject.

:::

## Story so far

We summarize our current knowledge of the landscape of languages in the
following diagram.

::: {figure} ./cfl-landscape.jpg

Current knowledge of landscape of languages. The set of context-free
languages are those that are recognized by nondeterministic pushdown
automata and generated by context-free grammars. The two models are
equivalent. An example non-regular language is $0^n1^n$. An example
language that is not context-free is $0^n1^n2^n$.

:::
